.. _rst_River Transport Model (RTM):

River Transport Model (RTM)
===============================

The RTM was developed to route total runoff from the land surface model
to either the active ocean or marginal seas which enables the hydrologic
cycle to be closed (Branstetter 2001, Branstetter and Famiglietti 1999).
This is needed to model ocean convection and circulation, which is
affected by freshwater input. It also provides another method of
diagnosing the performance of the land model because the river flow can
be directly compared to gauging station data (e.g., Dai and Trenberth
2002).

To improve global energy conservation when CLM is being run as part of
the Community Climate System Model, runoff is split into two streams, a
liquid water stream and an ice water stream (derived from excess
snowfall in snow-capped grid cells, section 7.7). The liquid and ice
streams are routed through the RTM, passed to, and dealt with by the
ocean separately.

The RTM uses a linear transport scheme to route water from each grid
cell to its downstream neighboring grid cell. The change in storage
:math:`S` of river water, whether it be liquid or ice, within a RTM grid
cell (m\ :sup:`3` s\ :sup:`-1`) is

.. math::
   :label: 14.1)

   \frac{dS}{dt} =\sum F_{in}  -F_{out} +R

where :math:`\sum F_{in}` is the sum of inflows of water from
neighboring upstream grid cells (m\ :sup:`3` s\ :sup:`-1`),
:math:`F_{out}`  is the flux of water leaving the grid cell in the
downstream direction (m :sup:`3` s\ :sup:`-1`), and :math:`R`
is the total runoff generated by the land model grid cell
(m\ :sup:`3` s\ :sup:`-1`). Downstream water flow direction in
each grid cell is determined as one of eight compass points (north,
northeast, east, southeast, south, southwest, west, and northwest) based
on the steepest downhill slope as determined from a digital elevation
model (Graham et al. 1999). The flux of water leaving the grid cell
:math:`F_{out}`  is

.. math::
   :label: 14.2) 

   F_{out} =\frac{v}{d} S

where :math:`v` is the effective water flow velocity (m
s\ :sup:`-1`), :math:`d` is the distance between centers of
neighboring grid cells (m), and :math:`S` is the volume of river water
stored within the grid cell (m\ :sup:`3`). The effective water flow
velocity can be estimated from Manning’s equation, which is a function
of surface water slope, the hydraulic radius of the river channel, and a
channel roughness coefficient (Dingman, 2002). However, hydraulic radius
and channel roughness data are not available globally, so a simplified
effective flow velocity expression is used in RTM

.. math::
   :label: 14.3) 

   v=\max \left(0.05,k\beta ^{1/2} \right)

where :math:`\beta`  is the grid cell mean topographic slope, and
:math:`k=1`.

The distance :math:`d` between two grid cell centers depends on river
direction, latitude, and longitude as

.. math::
   :label: 14.4) 

   d=\sqrt{\Delta x^{2} +\Delta y^{2} } .

The distance in the zonal direction :math:`\Delta x` (m) is

.. math::
   :label: 14.5) 

   \Delta x=\left(1\times 10^{3} \left|\theta _{i,\, j} -\theta _{i*,\, j*} \right|R_{e} \right)\left[0.5\left(\cos \phi _{i,\, j} +\cos \phi _{i*,\, j*} \right)\right]

where :math:`\theta _{i,\, j}`  and :math:`\theta _{i*,\, j*}`  are the
latitudes (radians) of the upstream and downstream grid cells,
:math:`\phi _{i,\, j}`  and :math:`\phi _{i*,\, j*}`  are the longitudes
(radians) of the upstream and downstream grid cells, :math:`R_{e}`  is
the radius of the earth (km) (Table 2.6), and :math:`i` and :math:`j`
are grid cell indices. The distance in the meridional direction
:math:`\Delta y` (m) is

.. math::
   :label: 14.6) 

   \Delta y=\left(1\times 10^{3} \left|\theta _{i,\, j} -\theta _{i*,\, j*} \right|R_{e} \right).

The RTM is generally run at a time step greater than that of the CLM
because of computational constraints. The total runoff from the land
model at each time step is accumulated until the RTM is invoked. The
total liquid water runoff at the land model resolution (kg
m\ :sup:`-2` s\ :sup:`-1`) is

.. math::
   :label: 14.7) 

   R_{liq} =q_{over} +q_{drai} +q_{rgwl}

where :math:`q_{over}`  is surface runoff (section 7.3),
:math:`q_{drai}`  is sub-surface drainage (section 7.6), and
:math:`q_{rgwl}`  is liquid runoff from glaciers, wetlands, and lakes
(all in kg m\ :sup:`-2` s\ :sup:`-1`) (sections 7.7 and
9.6.3). The total ice water runoff, also at the land model resolution is

.. math::
   :label: 14.8) 

   R_{ice} =q_{snwcp,ice}

where :math:`q_{snwcp,ice}`  is the ice runoff from snow-capped
surfaces (section 7.7). The runoff at the land model resolution is
interpolated to the resolution of RTM and converted to units of
m\ :sup:`3` s\ :sup:`-1` for use in equation (11.1) by multiplying
by :math:`1\times 10^{-3} A` where :math:`A` is the area
(m\ :sup:`2`) of the RTM grid cell.

The RTM grid cells that are at river mouths, hence providing freshwater
flux to the ocean, are identified by examining each RTM ocean grid cell
and determining if a RTM land grid cell flows to that ocean grid cell.
River mouth grid cells are also assigned if any overlapping grid cells
at the land model resolution contain land. When used as part of the
Community Climate System Model, the ocean freshwater liquid and ice
fluxes at the RTM resolution are passed to the flux coupler which
distributes the fluxes to the appropriate ocean grid cells. When used
with the Community Atmosphere Model or when run offline, RTM serves only
as a diagnostic tool. The river-routing scheme conserves water globally
as

.. math::
   :label: 14.9) 

   \sum _{i,\, j}\left(\frac{dS}{dt} \right) _{i,\, j} =\sum _{i,\, j}R_{i,\, j}  .


